# Shooting an Elephant and Other Essays

*George Orwell* (1950)

## Lear, Tolstoy and the Fool

[Read](http://www.orwell.ru/library/essays/lear/english/e_ltf)

There are families in which the father will say to his child, ‘You'll get
a thick car if you do that again’, while the mother, her eyes brimming over
with tears, will take the child in her arms and murmur lovingly, ‘Now, darling,
is it kind to Mummy to do that?’ And who would maintain that the second method
is less tyrannous than the first? The distinction that really matters is not
between violence and non-violence, but between having and not having the
appetite for power. There are people who are convinced of the wickedness both
of armies and of police forces, but who are nevertheless much more intolerant
and inquisitorial in outlook than the normal person who believes that it is
necessary to use violence in certain circumstances. They will not say to
somebody else, ‘Do this, that and the other or you will go to prison’, but they
will, if they can, get inside his brain and dictate his thoughts for him in the
minutest particulars. Creeds like pacifism and anarchism, which seem on the
surface to imply a complete renunciation of power, rather encourage this habit
of mind. For if you have embraced a creed which appears to be free from the
ordinary dirtiness of politics — a creed from which you yourself cannot expect
to draw any material advantage — surely that proves that you are in the right?
And the more you are in the right, the more natural that everyone else should
be bullied into thinking likewise.

## Poetry and the Microphone

[Read](http://www.orwell.ru/library/articles/poetry/english/e_poetry)

Broadcasting is what it is, not because there is something inherently vulgar,
silly and dishonest about the whole apparatus of microphone and transmitter,
but because all the broadcasting that now happens all over the world is under
the control of governments or great monopoly companies which are actively
interested in maintaining the status quo and therefore in preventing the common
man from becoming too intelligent.

The tendency of the modern state is to wipe out the freedom of the intellect,
and yet at the same time every state, especially under the pressure of war,
finds itself more and more in need of an intelligentsia to do its publicity for
it. The modern state needs, for example, pamphlet-writers, poster artists,
illustrators, broadcasters, lecturers, film producers, actors, song composers,
even painters and sculptors, not to mention psychologists, sociologists,
bio-chemists, mathematicians and what not.
