# Such, Such Were The Joys

*George Orwell* (1953)

## Looking back on the Spanish War

[Read online](http://www.orwell.ru/library/essays/Spanish_War/english/esw_1)

Early in life I have noticed that no event is ever correctly reported in
a newspaper, but in Spain, for the first time, I saw newspaper reports which
did not bear any relation to the facts, not even the relationship which is
implied in an ordinary lie. I saw great battles reported where there had been
no fighting, and complete silence where hundreds of men had been killed. I saw
troops who had fought bravely denounced as cowards and traitors, and others who
had never seen a shot fired hailed as the heroes of imaginary victories; and
I saw newspapers in London retailing these lies and eager intellectuals
building emotional superstructures over events that had never happened. I saw,
in fact, history being written not in terms of what happened but of what ought
to have happened according to various ‘party lines’.

This kind of thing is frightening to me, because it often gives me the feeling
that the very concept of objective truth is fading out of the world. After all,
the chances are that those lies, or at any rate similar lies, will pass into
history. How will the history of the Spanish war be written? If Franco remains
in power his nominees will write the history books, and (to stick to my chosen
point) that Russian army which never existed will become historical fact, and
schoolchildren will learn about it generations hence. But suppose Fascism is
finally defeated and some kind of democratic government restored in Spain in
the fairly near future; even then, how is the history of the war to be written?
What kind of records will Franco have left behind him? Suppose even that the
records kept on the Government side are recoverable — even so, how is a true
history of the war to be written? For, as I have pointed out already, the
Government, also dealt extensively in lies. From the anti-Fascist angle one
could write a broadly truthful history of the war, but it would be a partisan
history, unreliable on every minor point. Yet, after all, some kind of history
will be written, and after those who actually remember the war are dead, it
will be universally accepted. So for all practical purposes the lie will have
become truth.

I know it is the fashion to say that most of recorded history is lies anyway.
I am willing to believe that history is for the most part inaccurate and
biased, but what is peculiar to our own age is the abandonment of the idea that
history could be truthfully written. In the past people deliberately lied, or
they unconsciously coloured what they wrote, or they struggled after the truth,
well knowing that they must make many mistakes; but in each case they believed
that ‘facts’ existed and were more or less discoverable. And in practice there
was always a considerable body of fact which would have been agreed to by
almost everyone. If you look up the history of the last war in, for instance,
the Encyclopaedia Britannica, you will find that a respectable amount of the
material is drawn from German sources. A British and a German historian would
disagree deeply on many things, even on fundamentals, but there would still be
that body of, as it were, neutral fact on which neither would seriously
challenge the other. It is just this common basis of agreement, with its
implication that human beings are all one species of animal, that
totalitarianism destroys.

Nazi theory indeed specifically denies that such a thing as ‘the truth’ exists.
There is, for instance, no such thing as ‘Science’. There is only ‘German
Science’, ‘Jewish Science’, etc. The implied objective of this line of thought
is a nightmare world in which the Leader, or some ruling clique, controls not
only the future but the past. If the Leader says of such and such an event, ‘It
never happened’ — well, it never happened. If he says that two and two are five
— well, two and two are five. This prospect frightens me much more than bombs
— and after our experiences of the last few years that is not a frivolous
statement.

Nourished for hundreds of years on a literature in which Right invariably
triumphs in the last chapter, we believe half-instinctively that evil always
defeats itself in the long run. Pacifism, for instance, is founded largely on
this belief. Don't resist evil, and it will somehow destroy itself. But why
should it? What evidence is there that it does? And what instance is there of
a modern industrialized state collapsing unless conquered from the outside by
military force?

When I think of antiquity, the detail that frightens me is that those hundreds
of millions of slaves on whose backs civilization rested generation after
generation have left behind them no record whatever. We do not even know their
names. In the whole of Greek and Roman history, how many slaves’ names are
known to you? I can think of two, or possibly three. One is Spartacus and the
other is Epictetus. Also, in the Roman room at the British Museum there is
a glass jar with the maker's name inscribed on the bottom, ‘Felix fecit’.
I have a mental picture of poor Felix (a Gaul with red hair and a metal collar
round his neck), but in fact he may not have been a slave; so there are only
two slaves whose names I definitely know, and probably few people can remember
more. The rest have gone down into utter silence.

Time after time, in country after country, the organized working-class
movements have been crushed by open, illegal violence, and their comrades
abroad, linked to them in theoretical solidarity, have simply looked on and
done nothing; and underneath this, secret cause of many betrayals, has lain the
fact that between white and coloured workers there is not even lip-service to
solidarity. Who can believe in the class-conscious international proletariat
after the events of the past ten years? To the British working class the
massacre of their comrades in Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, or wherever it might be
seemed less interesting and less important than yesterday's football match.

One feature of the Nazi conquest of France was the astonishing defections among
the intelligentsia, including some of the left-wing political intelligentsia.
The intelligentsia are the people who squeal loudest against Fascism, and yet
a respectable proportion of them collapse into defeatism when the pinch comes.
They are far-sighted enough to see the odds against them, and moreoever they
can be bribed — for it is evident that the Nazis think it worth while to bribe
intellectuals. With the working class it is the other way about. Too ignorant
to see through the trick that is being played on them, they easily swallow the
promises of Fascism, yet sooner or later they always take up the struggle
again. They must do so, because in their own bodies they always discover that
the promises of Fascism cannot be fulfilled. To win over the working class
permanently, the Fascists would have to raise the general standard of living,
which they are unable and probably unwilling to do.

The hatred which the Spanish Republic excited in millionaires, dukes,
cardinals, play-boys, Blimps, and what-not would in itself be enough to show
one how the land lay. In essence it was a class war. If it had been won, the
cause of the common people everywhere would have been strengthened. It was
lost, and the dividend-drawers all over the world rubbed their hands. That was
the real issue; all else was froth on its surface.

The Trotskyist thesis that the war could have been won if the revolution had
not been sabotaged was probably false. To nationalize factories, demolish
churches, and issue revolutionary manifestoes would not have made the armies
more efficient. The Fascists won because they were the stronger; they had
modern arms and the others hadn't. No political strategy could offset that.

The most baffling thing in the Spanish war was the behaviour of the great
powers. The war was actually won for Franco by the Germans and Italians, whose
motives were obvious enough. The motives of France and Britain are less easy to
understand. In 1936 it was clear to everyone that if Britain would only help
the Spanish Government, even to the extent of a few million pounds’ worth of
arms, Franco would collapse and German strategy would be severely dislocated.
By that time one did not need to be a clairvoyant to foresee that war between
Britain and Germany was coming; one could even foretell within a year or two
when it would come. Yet in the most mean, cowardly, hypocritical way the
British ruling class did all they could to hand Spain over to Franco and the
Nazis. Why? Because they were pro-Fascist, was the obvious answer. Undoubtedly
they were, and yet when it came to the final showdown they chose to Stand up to
Germany. It is still very uncertain what plan they acted on in backing Franco,
and they may have had no clear plan at all. Whether the British ruling class
are wicked or merely stupid is one of the most difficult questions of our time,
and at certain moments a very important question.

Petain attributes the fall of France to the common people's ‘love of pleasure’.
One sees this in its right perspective if one stops to wonder how much pleasure
the ordinary French peasant's or working-man's life would contain compared with
Petain's own. The damned impertinence of these politicians, priests, literary
men, and what-not who lecture the working-class socialist for his
‘materialism’! All that the working man demands is what these others would
consider the indispensable minimum without which human life cannot be lived at
all. Enough to eat, freedom from the haunting terror of unemployment, the
knowledge that your children will get a fair chance, a bath once a day, clean
linen reasonably often, a roof that doesn't leak, and short enough working
hours to leave you with a little energy when the day is done. Not one of those
who preach against ‘materialism’ would consider life livable without these
things.

The major problem of our time is the decay of the belief in personal
immortality, and it cannot be dealt with while the average human being is
either drudging like an ox or shivering in fear of the secret police.


## Inside the Whale

[Read online](http://www.orwell.ru/library/essays/whale/english/e_itw)

Of course a novelist is not obliged to write directly about contemporary
history, but a novelist who simply disregards the major public events of the
moment is generally either a footler or a plain idiot.

Exile is probably more damaging to a novelist than to a painter or even a poet,
because its effect is to take him out of contact with working life and narrow
down his range to the street, the cafe, the church, the brothel and the studio.

Life has a buoyant, carefree quality that you can feel as you read, like
a physical sensation in your belly. If is this that Whitman is celebrating,
though actually he does it very badly, because he is one of those writers who
tell you what you ought to feel instead of making you feel it.

To accept civilization as it is practically means accepting decay.

When one says that a writer is fashionable one practically always means that he
is admired by people under thirty.

But what is noticeable about all these writers is that what ‘purpose’ they have
is very much up in the air. There is no attention to the urgent problems of the
moment, above all no politics in the narrower sense. Our eyes are directed to
Rome, to Byzantium, to Montparnasse, to Mexico, to the Etruscans, to the
Subconscious, to the solar plexus — to everywhere except the places where
things are actually happening.

What is perhaps less obvious is just why the leading writers of the twenties
were predominantly pessimistic. Why always the sense of decadence, the skulls
and cactuses, the yearning after lost faith and impossible civilizations? Was
it not, after all, because these people were writing in an exceptionally
comfortable epoch? It is just in such times that ‘cosmic despair’ can flourish.
People with empty bellies never despair of the universe, nor even think about
the universe, for that matter. The whole period 1910-30 was a prosperous one,
and even the war years were physically tolerable if one happened to be
a non-combatant in one of the Allied countries.

In some of the minor characteristic novels of the period, books like Told by an
Idiot, the despair-of-life reaches a Turkish-bath atmosphere of self-pity.

The first test of any work of art is survival, and it is a fact that a great
deal that was written in the period 1910-30 has survived and looks like
continuing to survive.

Alliances, changes of front etc., which only make sense as part of the game of
power politics have to be explained and justified in terms of international
socialism. Every time Stalin swaps partners, ‘Marxism’ has to be hammered into
a new shape. This entails sudden and violent changes of ‘line’, purges,
denunciations, systematic destruction of party literature, etc., etc. Every
Communist is in fact liable at any moment to have to alter his most fundamental
convictions, or leave the party.

The warmongering to which the English intelligentsia gave themselves up in the
period 1935-9 was largely based on a sense of personal immunity. The attitude
was very different in France, where the military service is hard to dodge and
even literary men know the weight of a pack.

The latter part of the book, however, is autobiographical and consists of an
account, fascinatingly accurate, of life at a preparatory school and Eton in
the years 1910-20. Mr Connolly ends by remarking: Were I to deduce anything
from my feelings on leaving Eton, it might be called The Theory of Permanent
Adolescence. It is the theory that the experiences undergone by boys at the
great public schools are so intense as to dominate their lives and to arrest
their development.

When you read the second sentence in this passage, your natural impulse is to
look for the misprint. Presumably there is a ‘not’ left out, or something. But
no, not a bit of it! He means it! And what is more, he is merely speaking the
truth, in an inverted fashion. ‘Cultured’ middle-class life has reached a depth
of softness at which a public-school education — five years in a lukewarm bath
of snobbery — can actually be looked back upon as an eventful period.

To nearly all the writers who have counted during the thirties, what more has
ever happened than Mr Connolly records in Enemies of Promise? It is the same
pattern all the time; public school, university, a few trips abroad, then
London. Hunger, hardship, solitude, exile, war, prison, persecution, manual
labour — hardly even words. No wonder that the huge tribe known as ‘the right
left people’ found it so easy to condone the purge-and-Ogpu side of the Russian
régime and the horrors of the first Five-Year Plan. They were so gloriously
incapable of understanding what it all meant.

Literature as we know it is an individual thing, demanding mental honesty and
a minimum of censorship. And this is even truer of prose than of verse. It is
probably not a coincidence that the best writers of the thirties have been
poets. The atmosphere of orthodoxy is always damaging to prose, and above all
it is completely ruinous to the novel, the most anarchical of all forms of
literature.

How many Roman Catholics have been good novelists? Even the handful one could
name have usually been bad Catholics. The novel is practically a Protestant
form of art; it is a product of the free mind, of the autonomous individual. No
decade in the past hundred and fifty years has been so barren of imaginative
prose as the nineteen-thirties. There have been good poems, good sociological
works, brilliant pamphlets, but practically no fiction of any value at all.

But the interesting passage is one in which he compares Anais Nin — evidently
a completely subjective, introverted writer — to Jonah in the whale's belly. In
passing he refers to an essay that Aldous Huxley wrote some years ago about El
Greco's picture, The Dream of Philip the Second. Huxley remarks that the people
in El Greco's pictures always look as though they were in the bellies of
whales, and professes to find something peculiarly horrible in the idea of
being in a ‘visceral prison’. Miller retorts that, on the contrary, there are
many worse things than being swallowed by whales, and the passage makes it dear
that he himself finds the idea rather attractive. Here he is touching upon what
is probably a very widespread fantasy. It is perhaps worth noticing that
everyone, at least every English-speaking person, invariably speaks of Jonah
and the whale. Of course the creature that swallowed Jonah was a fish, and was
so described in the Bible (Jonah i. 17), but children naturally confuse it with
a whale, and this fragment of baby-talk is habitually carried into later life
— a sign, perhaps, of the hold that the Jonah myth has upon our imaginations.
For the fact is that being inside a whale is a very comfortable, cosy, homelike
thought. The historical Jonah, if he can be so called, was glad enough to
escape, but in imagination, in day-dream, countless people have envied him. It
is, of course, quite obvious why. The whale's belly is simply a womb big enough
for an adult. There you are, in the dark, cushioned space that exactly fits
you, with yards of blubber between yourself and reality, able to keep up an
attitude of the completest indifference, no matter what happens. A storm
that would sink all the battleships in the world would hardly reach you as
an echo. Even the whale's own movements would probably be imperceptible to
you. He might be wallowing among the surface waves or shooting down into
the blackness of the middle seas (a mile deep, according to Herman
Melville), but you would never notice the difference. Short of being dead,
it is the final, unsurpassable stage of irresponsibility.

What is quite obviously happening, war or no war, is the break-up of
laissez-faire capitalism and of the liberal-Christian culture. Until recently
the full implications of this were not foreseen, because it was generally
imagined that socialism could preserve and even enlarge the atmosphere of
liberalism. It is now beginning to be realized how false this idea was. Almost
certainly we are moving into an age of totalitarian dictatorships — an age in
which freedom of thought will be at first a deadly sin and later on
a meaningless abstraction. The autonomous individual is going to be stamped out
of existence.


## Such, Such Were The Joys

[Read online](http://www.orwell.ru/library/essays/joys/english/e_joys)

I was crying partly because I felt that this was expected of me, partly from
genuine repentance, but partly also because of a deeper grief which is peculiar
to childhood and not easy to convey: a sense of desolate loneliness and
helplessness, of being locked up not only in a hostile world but in a world of
good and evil where the rules were such that it was actually not possible for
me to keep them.

It was possible, therefore, to commit a sin without knowing that you committed
it, without wanting to commit it, and without being able to avoid it. Sin was
not necessarily something that you did: it might be something that happened to
you.

But at any rate this was the great, abiding lesson of my boyhood: that I was in
a world where it was not possible for me to be good.

This business of making a gifted boy's career depend on a competitive
examination, taken when he is only twelve or thirteen is an evil thing at best,
but there do appear to be preparatory schools which send scholars to Eton,
Winchester, etc. without teaching them to see everything in terms of marks.

Subjects which lacked examination-value, such as geography, were almost
completely neglected, mathematics was also neglected if you were a ‘classical’,
science was not taught in any form — indeed it was so despised that even an
interest in natural history was discouraged — and even the books you were
encouraged to read in your spare time were chosen with one eye on the ‘English
paper’. Latin and Greek, the main scholarship subjects, were what counted, but
even these were deliberately taught in a flashy, unsound way. We never, for
example, read right through even a single book of a Greek or Latin author: we
merely read short passages which were picked out because they were the kind of
thing likely to be set as an ‘unseen translation’. During the last year or so
before we went up for our scholarships, most of our time was spent in simply
working our way through the scholarship papers of previous years.

History was a series of unrelated, unintelligible but — in some way that was
never explained to us — important facts with resounding phrases tied to them.

I recall positive orgies of dates, with the keener boys leaping up and down in
their places in their eagerness to shout out the right answers, and at the same
time not feeling the faintest interest in the meaning of the mysterious events
they were naming.

‘1587’  
‘Massacre of St Bartholomew!’  
‘1707?’  
‘Death of Aurangzeeb!’  
‘1713?’  
‘Treaty of Utrecht!’  
‘1773?’  
‘Boston Tea Party!’  
‘1520?’  
‘Oo, Mum, please, Mum—’  
‘Please, Mum, please Mum! Let me tell him, Mum!’  
‘Well! 1520?’  
‘Field of the Cloth of Gold!’

And so on.

The boys of the scholarship class were not all treated alike. If a boy were the
son of rich parents to whom the saving of fees was not all-important, Sambo
would goad him along in a comparatively fatherly way, with jokes and digs in
the ribs and perhaps an occasional tap with the pencil, but no hair-pulling and
no caning. It was the poor but ‘clever’ boys who suffered. Our brains were
a gold-mine in which he had sunk money, and the dividends must be squeezed out
of us. Long before I had grasped the nature of my financial relationship with
Sambo, I had been made to understand that I was not on the same footing as most
of the other boys. In effect there were three castes in the school. There was
the minority with an aristocratic or millionaire background, there were the
children of the ordinary suburban rich, who made up the bulk of the school, and
there were a few underlings like myself, the sons of clergyman, Indian civil
servants, struggling widows and the like. These poorer ones were discouraged
from going in for ‘extras’ such as shooting and carpentry, and were humiliated
over clothes and petty possessions. I never, for instance, succeeded in getting
a cricket bat of my own, because ‘Your parents wouldn't be able to afford it’.
This phrase pursued me throughout my schooldays.

At St Cyprian's we were not allowed to keep the money we brought back with us,
but had to ‘give it in’ on the first day of term, and then from time to time
were allowed to spend it under supervision. I and similarly-placed boys were
always choked off from buying expensive toys like model aeroplanes, even if the
necessary money stood to our credit. Flip, in particular, seemed to aim
consciously at inculcating a humble outlook in the poorer boys. ‘Do you think
that's the sort of thing a boy like you should buy?’ I remember her saying to
somebody — and she said this in front of the whole school: ‘You know you're not
going to grow up with money, don't you? Your people aren't rich. You must learn
to be sensible. Don't get above yourself!’ There was also the weekly
pocket-money, which we took out in sweets, dispensed by Flip from a large
table.

Very early it was impressed upon me that I had no chance of a decent future
unless I won a scholarship at a public school. Either I won my scholarship, or
I must leave school at fourteen and become, in Sambo's favourite phrase ‘a
little office boy at forty pounds a year’. In my circumstances it was natural
that I should believe this. Indeed, it was universally taken for granted at St
Cyprian's that unless you went to a ‘good’ public school (and only about
fifteen schools came under this heading) you were ruined for life.

It is not easy to convey to a grown-up person the sense of strain, of nerving
oneself for some terrible, all-deciding combat, as the date of the examination
crept nearer — eleven years old, twelve years old, then thirteen, the fatal
year itself! Over a period of about two years, I do not think there was ever
a day when ‘the exam’, as I called it, was quite out of my waking thoughts.

And yet curiously enough I was also tormented by an almost irresistible impulse
not to work. There were days when my heart sickened at the labours ahead of me,
and I stood stupid as an animal before the most elementary difficulties. In the
holidays, also, I could not work.

But in term-time, also, I would go through periods of idleness and stupidity
when I would sink deeper and deeper into disgrace and even achieve a sort of
feeble, snivelling defiance, fully conscious of my guilt and yet unable or
unwilling — I could not be sure which — to do any better.

But it is difficult for a child to realize that a school is primarily
a commercial venture. A child believes that the school exists to educate and
that the school-master disciplines him either for his own good, or from a love
of bullying.

She had a hardly-varying vocabulary of praise and abuse, a whole series of set
phrased, each of which promptly called forth the appropriate response. There
was ‘Buck up, old chap!’, which inspired one to paroxysms of energy; there was
‘Don't be such a fool!’ (or, ‘It's pathetic, isn't it?’), which made one feel
a born idiot; and there was ‘It isn't very straight of you, is it?’, which
always brought one to the brink of tears. And yet all the while, at the middle
of one's heart, there seemed to stand an incorruptible inner self who knew that
whatever one did — whether one laughed or snivelled or went into frenzies of
gratitude for small favours — one's only true feeling was hatred.

The various codes which were presented to you at St Cyprian's — religious,
moral social and intellectual — contradicted one another if you worked out
their implications. The essential conflict was between the tradition of
nineteenth-century asceticism and the actually existing luxury and snobbery of
the pre-1914 age. On the one side were low-church Bible Christianity, sex
puritanism, insistence on hard work, respect for academic distinction,
disapproval of self-indulgence: on the other, contempt for ‘braininess’, and
worship of games, contempt for foreigners and the working class, an almost
neurotic dread of poverty, and, above all, the assumption not only that money
and privilege are the things that matter, but that it is better to inherit them
than to have to work for them. Broadly, you were bidden to be at once
a Christian and a social success, which is impossible.

But it was clear that I could never find my way into that paradise, to which
you did not really belong unless you were born into it. You could only make
money, if at all by a mysterious operation called ‘going to the city’, and when
you came out of the City, having won you £100,000, you were fat and old. But
the truly enviable thing about the top-notchers was that they were rich while
young. For people like me, the ambitious middle class, the examination-passers,
only a bleak, laborious kind of success was possible. You clambered upwards on
a ladder of scholarships into the Civil Service or the Indian Civil Service, or
possibly you became a barrister. And if at any point you ‘slacked’ or ‘went
off’ and missed one of the rungs in the ladder, you became ‘a little office boy
at forty pounds a year’.

You were supposed to love God, and I did not question this. Till the age of
about fourteen I believed in God, and believed that the accounts given of him
were true. But I was well aware that I did not love him. On the contrary,
I hated him, just as I hated Jesus and the Hebrew patriarchs. If I had
sympathetic feelings towards any character in the Old Testament, it was towards
such people as Cain, Jezebel, Haman, Agag, Sisera: in the New Testament my
friends, if any, were Ananias, Caiaphas, Judas and Pontius Pilate. But the
whole business of religion seemed to be strewn with psychological
impossibilities. The Prayer Book told you, for example, to love God and fear
him: but how could you love someone whom you feared?

At the time I could not see beyond the moral dilemma that is presented to the
weak in a world governed by the strong: Break the rules, or perish. I did not
see that in that case the weak have the right to make a different set of rules
for themselves; because, even if such an idea had occurred to me, there was no
one in my environment who could have confirmed me in it. I lived in a world
of boys, gregarious animals questioning nothing, accepting the law of the
stronger and avenging their own humiliations by passing them down to
someone smaller. My situation was that of countless other boys, and if
potentially I was more of a rebel than most, it was only because, by boyish
standards, I was a poorer specimen. But I never did rebel intellectually,
only emotionally. I had nothing to help me except my dumb selfishness, my
inability — not, indeed, to despise myself, but to dislike myself — my
instinct to survive.

Looking back on my own childhood, after the infant years were over, I do not
believe that I ever felt love for any mature person, except my mother, and even
her I did not trust, in the sense that shyness made me conceal most of my real
feelings from her. Love, the spontaneous, unqualified emotion of love, was
something I could only feel for people who were young. Towards people who were
old — and remember that ‘old’ to a child means over thirty, or even over
twenty-five — I could feel reverence respect, admiration or compunction, but
I seemed cut off from them by a veil of fear and shyness mixed up with physical
distaste.

All who have passed the age of thirty are joyless grotesques, endlessly fussing
about things of no importance and staying alive without so far as the child can
see, having anything to live for. Only child life is real life. The
schoolmaster who imagines that he is loved and trusted by his boys is in fact
mimicked and laughed at behind his back. An adult who does not seem dangerous
nearly always seems ridiculous.
