# Objections to Anarchism

### The Principles of Anarchism are Timeless Truths

*By Michael E. Coughlin*

> The following was originally published in serial form in the dandelion between
> Summer 1977 and Summer 1979.

From time to time we will deal with some of the more common objections to
anarchism, giving both the criticisms and our answers. Neither critique nor
answer can be comprehensive or exhaustive, but they will attempt to outline the
problem and suggest an anarchist's approach to answering it. Readers are invited
to contribute both critiques and answers.

## OBJECTION #1

In a state of nature man lived in ruthless and uncontrolled competition with his
neighbors. Government was formed to combat this destructive tendency, to bring
order out of chaos, to provide the minimum order required for social stability.

**ANSWER:** Philosophers have long speculated on the origins of human social
life and political life. Some have pictured the ancient condition of man as one
of total chaos where people went about plundering everything and murdering
everyone they could find. Only government, they say, brought order and peace to
this world of conflict. Others have argued with some force that people joined
together basically for economic reasons - it simply was the only practical way
to survive. They have further argued that this need for physical survival
ultimately brought government into being since people needed an organization to
settle their personal disputes and to protect them from rapacious
outsiders. Both theories are based on benevolent views of government and they
form the basis for many people's idea of what government is today, or at least
what they think government should be today.

Neither theory, however, offers an historically realistic appraisal of the
origin and nature of government. A third and much more promising theory was
advanced by Franz Oppenheimer, who argued that the state is formed from
conquest.

It is, however, difficult to determine how men actually lived in "a state of
nature" because we have few records of how social life was then organized. Since
we can know little of the primeval beginnings of the human race, it is best that
we look at man as we see him every day around us.

It takes little discernment to realize that all modern governments are the
result not of benevolent policemenship, as many political scientists would like
us to believe, but of conquest, of intrigue and power struggles, and of a desire
to gain advantage over others through the creation of the state.

Modern governments were not formed by a social contract, not even one remotely
resembling Rousseau's ideal. Rather, some of them are the result of revolutions
which merely exchanged one set of rulers for another, while others are the
children of ancient governments that have passed down the lordship they gained
centuries ago through conquest from one generation of political class to
another.

Man could not possibly live as a social animal if he lived in a world of
universal antagonism. Social life is made possible by our knowledge that most
people most of the time are not going to hurt each other or steal from each
other. Without that assurance all social life would come to a standstill and
there would be no agency or organization of any kind that could bring peace and
order out of such a situation.

Man is a social animal and for the most part he will live in cooperative,
peaceful relations with his neighbors. It is in this fact of nature, and not
some supposed magical power of government, that we discover the essential
ingredient for understanding social stability. People by their nature get along
with each other. Government doesn't bring them together or keep them
together. People live social lives because it is to their advantage to do
so. Government doesn't create order out of chaos. The order of social life is
already here.


## OBJECTION #2

There will always be disputes between people. This is the nature of man. We need
someone to arbitrate those disputes and peacefully and justly reach a settlement
of them.

**ANSWER:** In every age and among all people there will arise some
disagreements which will be impossible for the disputants to settle peacefully
themselves. This is a fact of nature which no anarchist or any other reasonable
person will deny.

Though recognizing that there will be disputes and conflict between some people,
we must not make the mistake of assuming that most social relationships will be
of this nature. Most dealings between people are peaceful and those that involve
some conflict are generally resolved satisfactorily and peacefully by the
parties actually involved in the disagreement. Only a few such conflicts must be
arbitrated by outside parties.

Any dispute that goes to the point of outside arbitration or settlement involves
a conflict which will not be settled to the complete satisfaction of both
parties.

As George Barrett explained it in his classic pamphlet Objections to Anarchism:
"If there are two persons who want the exclusive right to the same thing, it is
quite obvious that there is no satisfactory solution to the problem. It does not
matter in the least what system of society you suggest, you cannot possibly
satisfy that position."

This is as much a fact of nature as is the reality that some people will
sometimes get involved in conflict. To assume, as the objection does, that
governmentally imposed verdict will be a "peaceful" and a "just" one acceptable
to both parties involved, is an unwarrented assumption. It has no fact in nature
and no standing in experience. The only thing that "resolves" the conflict is
the state's power to enforce its verdict. This ability to club one or both
parties into submission to its command is called "justice." It's the only kind
of "justice" the state knows and can administer.

It's through this system of "justice" that every state has used its power to
favor its friends and to punish its enemies and, in every case, to increase its
power over the people.

As anarchists, we say with George Barrett, "such disputes are very much better
settled without the interference of authority."

But if it is argued that leaving disputes to be settled voluntarily and without
the interference of some ultimate and powerful authority will lead to the
eventual domination of the strong over the weak, we answer that today this
precisely what you have. The government's strength insures that its will will be
done, whether the ends of true justice are served or not.

Perhaps the most socially destructive and far reaching influence this system of
"justice via the club" has, lies in what it does to people themselves. It
accustoms them to violent settlements of their differences instead of forcing
them to rely on the sometimes more difficult but ultimately more peaceful system
of arbitrating their problems. In the long run a people's dependence on
governmentally established procedures for settling disputes leads to a crippling
of that people's ability to settle their own disputes. It accustoms them to look
to power for a settlement of all their difficulties and ultimately to confuse
real justice with justice brought by the club. It leads in the end to more
conflict as people grapple for the reigns of power in order to impose their
desires on their neighbors. A lust for power is created and rewarded. The
natural tendency of people to peacefully and voluntarily settle their problems
is replaced by a system that neither honors nor respects nor tolerates our
neighbors.

At the heart of our answer to the second objection are two observations
anarchists have long made:

1) that disputes between individuals will neither be common nor long-lived and
will not be as destructive to life and property and as hurtful to innocent and
uninvolved third parties as are disputes that arise between peoples when they
are ruled by governments.

2) that free people, though far from perfect, will be more likely to find
reasonable and just solutions to human problems than will ever be found through
the exercise of the state's power to intervene in all disputes.


## OBJECTION #3

The use of force, even retaliatory force, cannot be left to the discretion of
individuals. Peaceful co-existence is impossible if people have to worry
constantly about their neighbors clubbing them at any moment.

**ANSWER**: There are several implied fallacies in this objection:

1) that in a system of non-coercive or natural justice, that is, in an anarchist
world, people will naturally degenerate into vile creatures and turn on their
neighbors. There will be a war of all against all. (See Objection #4.)

2) that people will quite naturally turn to the club as the foundation of all
their social relationships. Violence is viewed as the most effective method of
securing valuable human relationships.

3) Leaving retaliatory force in the government's hands will insure that it will
be used only as retaliatory force, and when it is administered, it will be done
so justly.

As anarchists, we say with Benjamin Tucker: "the State takes advantage of its
monopoly of defence to furnish invasion instead of protection." Because we
rightly fear power in anyone's hands, we recognize the foolhardiness of
establishing a government with a monopoly of power and then expecting that
government not to abuse that power. If it's dangerous to allow individuals to
protect themselves, how much more dangerous it is to give that power to
government.


## OBJECTION #4

Anarchism must ultimately lead to violence, to a war of all
against all. Without some institution to define the rules of social life and
enforce those rules, there will be chaos.

**ANSWER**: This objection rests upon a basic but always recurring fallacy - the
notion that men are by nature anti-social and anti-cooperative. And just as
wrongly, it proposes government as the solution to man's supposed inclination to
destroy or injure all of his fellow humans. This is a positively absurd concept
of man's nature and is topped only by the even more absurd faith government
preachers have in an assumed benevolent nature of government.

Government does not spring from some fancied weakness in human nature that
demands it exist to protect us from each other. Rather, it is created by
conquest and is a tool used by a ruling clique to rule and exploit others.

The idea that government springs from man's wickedness, yet itself somehow
remaining immune to that wickedness, has been rumbling around in the heads of
government apologists for centuries. But, how can imperfect men be given power
over their fellow men and be expected to use the power in any but an imperfect
way? The mystique of the state apparently makes that question unnecessary for
government believers to answer.

Imperfect men driven by imperfect motives somehow, by the theory of government
apologists, create perfect or near perfect mechanisms for settling the most
pressing problems that afflict men. If there is any theory that qualifies for
the land of make-believe, it is this faith in the wisdom, justice, and
benevolence of government.

We can, and as anarchists, we do recognize that some people, regardless of the
social system involved, will take advantage of others. We deny that this
exploitation will be widespread and we can point to solid social evidence to
prove our position. What violence there is will be sporadic and short-lived and
will have no relation to the bogeyman of "war of all against all" preached by
anti-anarchists. Though disputes will not be widespread, or numerous, they will,
however, occur.

We must find ways to protect ourselves from predators. But we suggest that the
way to do that is not to give people naturally bent toward predation
(politicians and other power seekers) a sanctioned means to control us.

In addition to recognizing that there will be no general "war of all against
all" in an anarchist world, it is important to note, in dealing with this
objection, that between anarchists and statists there is a fundamental
difference in their approach to dealing with human problems. It was outlined
well by Fred Woodworth in his interesting pamphlet on "Anarchism," when he
wrote:

> Whereas ordinary people will normally rank interpersonal violence as a
> last resort of social breakdown or crisis, government operates with
> violence as its immediate priority; determined course of action are
> decreed, not voluntarily decided upon; ordered, not freely accepted. If
> the principle of government were extended consistently and uniformly
> throughout society, true chaos would result - every civilized relationship
> would give way to the gun or knife; force, not persuasion. We have only
> the principle of Anarchy operating - the principle of no compulsion - to
> thank for the fact that the present social condition is not as faulty as
> it might be. Numerous social interactions even today still taKe place with
> an absence of compulsion, although State-ordained procedures are of course
> increasing daily. In the remaining spontaneous relationships between
> persons there is no ubiquitous policeman interceding (yet); nonetheless,
> most transactions, conversations, even quarrels, are accomplished without
> resort to coercion. Government's standard operating procedure is to use
> coercion first and discuss matters afterward: "Under penalty of three
> years in the federal penitentiary or $10,000 fine, or both, you are
> herewith required to.." etc. This reversal of proper order, and
> exaggerated tendency to resort to force, is completely typical of
> governments; the tendency to place social compulsion uppermost is
> certainly not natural or justified. It should be noted that even those
> people who defend government get along fine without it in their relations
> with friends or neighbors, most of the time, and woud think a person rude,
> insulting, and violent who behaved privately as governments do publicly.

Without government and the power government has to deliver a regimented
"justice," people would have no effective or sustained means of dominating their
neighbors. Without government they would have to deal with each other as equals
and use persuasion and compromise as the basic tools of their social
relationships.

But with government, they can short-circuit all the natural social bonds people
create to peacefully settle problems. They don't need to persuade; they can club
you into submission. They don't need to deal with you directly, they can
manipulate a third party to do their bullying for them. Neighbors are driven
apart by government. When there is force involved, the ties developed by natural
society are crushed.

Left to themselves, people will develop their own rules of social life. These
rules need not be uniform in all places, and there need be no one special method
of enforcing them. People will naturally find their own solutions to problems
and their own ways of establishing and defining the rules of their social
life. As anarchists we do not dictate what social institutions will be used to
deal with crime. People will have to discover them for themselves.

It's not anarchism that breeds chaos. To government belongs that
responsibility. It is not the anarchists who are the violent members of
society - it's the government rulers that hold that distinction.


## OBJECTION #5

If you propose private protection and defense agencies, as some libertarians do,
then what is to keep them from becoming coercive governments themselves?

**ANSWER:** I don't propose any system of social organization. Whether people
would establish agencies for defense purposes or would keep that responsibility
for themselves, makes no difference. So long as they did it without coercion,
whatever form it took, it would be anarchistic. Anarchist philosophy doesn't
dictate what system of protection would be best; that is a practical problem
that must be solved again and again by people everywhere.

If tomorrow all police functions were turned over to private police forces, we
would have no libertarian society. We would just exchange one set of masters for
another. Private police forces are no guarantee of a libertarian society, only
the people are. And the people will do it only when they are properly disposed
to creating a truly free world. Benjamin Tucker explained it thus: "The moment
one abandons the idea that he was born to discover what is right and enforce it
upon the rest of the world, he begins to feel an increasing disposition to let
others alone and to refrain even from retaliation or resistance except in those
emergencies which immediately and imperatively require it." When enough people
feel this way, we will have an anarchist society.

Anarchism is a social revolution that will occur only from the bottom up, never
from the top down. It must be a people's movement, not a leaders' movement.

To talk about private police forces without realizing that they are not an
essential element in creating a libertarian world, but might be a natural
outgrowth of that world, is to confuse cause with effect. Such police forces
won't bring anarchism, but anarchism might create such police forces. There are
no formulas for creating a libertarian social order, and there is, likewise, no
way of knowing what shapes social institutions will take in a libertarian
society. The future must be free to make its own arrangements. We are not here
to design blueprints for society. We are proposing no utopia.


## OBJECTION #6

What will we do with criminals in an anarchist world?

**ANSWER:** Most "criminals" in our government-controlled world are victims of
the law. They are criminals not because they have injured someone else, but
because they have violated some government commandment. They have broken some
victimless crime law or some edict the state proclaimed to promote its own
welfare, e.g., the draft law or income tax law. Abolish the state and these
people will no longer be criminals.

There are some individuals who are genuine criminals - the robber, rapist,
murderer - who will have to be dealt with. Whether we protect ourselves
individually from these ruffians, or by organizing private defense agencies;
whether we try them in courts or at the scene of the crime; whether we imprison
them or make them pay restitution to their victims, are all issues that must be
settled by anarchist societies when they are faced with the problems. Free
people will find ways to secure protection and justice for themselves. The point
to be understood is that they will do it for themselves when the need
arises. It's not for us to program how they must do it.

There is yet another type of criminal, the institutional criminal, that poses
the greatest danger to the health, safety, and welfare of people. He, too, is
created by the law, but he has this advantage over all other criminals; he is
also the law-maker and the judge of his laws. He is the government.

It is government itself that has been the world's greatest criminal. In the name
of patriotism or national defense or manifest destiny or just plain greed, he
has slaughtered more people, stolen more money, and terrorized more individuals
than have all the criminals throughout all the centuries of human history. It is
government that wages war, operates concentration camps and taxes the
people. It's government that used the rack, operated the guillotine, and dropped
the atom bomb. Not anarchists. It's not an anarchist world that is chaotic and
full of conflict - it's the one in which the state exists. And it's because of
the state, not in spite of it, htat we have all these.

What do we do with criminals in an anarchist world? We get rid of the biggest
one and try to deal with the rest as best we can.


## OBJECTION #7

We grant that government has grown too big and with that growth has come
admitted problems. But the answer lies in limiting the scope of the government,
not eliminating it. We must make it our servant, not our master.

**ANSWER:** This is the plaintive cry of the "limited government" preachers. To
this Benjamin Tucker replied: "If limited government is good, the perfection of
government is no government."

Somehow, somewhere, given a properly intelligent, some say, "objective"
populace, the limited government buff suggests that it will be possible to
create a machinery of government that will be controllable. Some of these
little-government people may even go so far as to tell you how they will do
it. But for most it is pure dream and hope out of which they build their plans
for a utopian government.

In many instances this thing they want to create and call a limited government
has no relationship and none of the essential characteristics, of any government
that has ever existed. Generally, these model states have no power to tax and no
absolute jurisdiction over a given territory. Without these essential powers
there can be no government.

Government grows; that is its nature. Government is a power broker and an
instrument for creating privilege. It must continually take on new functions in
order to survive.

Not even the most holy Ayn Rand, followed as she might be with an army of the
most objective of objectivists, can change this. It is a fact; it is history. It
is the very nature of government.

Regardless of the lessons of history, these limited governmentalists assure us
that it is within their power to create a limited government. And these are
people who insist on calling anarchists "dreamers" and "utopians."


## OBJECTION #8

You anarchists are utopians. You don't really understand the nature of man. You
put too much faith and trust in him to do good. Your dreams are fine, given
perfect men, but in a real world they just won't work.

**ANSWER:** It's not the anarchist who doesn't understand the nature of man.
It's not the anarchist who refuses to learn the lessons history has repeatedly
taught. It's not the anarchist who continually puts his hopes in new promises of
some nirvana ruled by a "limited" government.

The anarchist cannot be blamed for the world's chaos and terror - for its wars
and prison camps and execution chambers, for its surveillance of citizens, for
the confiscations of people's property and for the ever-present threat of
world-wide nuclear annihilation.

Because we give man credit for being a social animal, we are willing to trust
him to deal peaceably with his neighbors - at least most of the time. But we are
also wise enough to realize that if we don't want men to abuse power, then we
must not give them power. We are realists who recognize man has a social nature,
and realists who also know that man, when tempted by power, will be corrupted by
it. We say, let man's social nature be the bond that ties men to each other. Yet
we warn at the same time that it is because of man's imperfect nature that we
must not create government and then trust him to use it peacefully.

Anarchists live in the real world undeluded by dreams of perfect governments,
and by hopes that government can reduce crime and eliminate war. We gave up
those illusions years ago.


## OBJECTION #9

I have appreciated getting the dandelion from time to time, and I must say I
feel a bit guilty for not being able to subscribe to it. It's not for financial
reasons, it's just that I find libertarian views upsetting. Maybe it's because
without a government such as the one in this country I'd be a miserable
hunchback, out of work, or, perhaps worse than that, I'd probably be pushing
daisies in a cemetary somewhere.

When I had polio my folks were too poor to afford all of the medical bills
without assistance from the government. The operations I had in later years, my
education, my rehabilitation, and my current employment are all the result of
government financing. I believe the U.S. government has been exemplary in
providing assistance to the underprivileged, the down-and-out.

Sure, I'm the first to realize the problems in this country, economic, social,
etc., but to tout another way by continual criticism of what is, is
counterproductive. Give me concrete, workable ways a libertarian based society
would protect civil rights, keep the peace, help the economically, physically
and mentally disadvantaged of this world. Show me how it would provide food for
all of its citizens, stop the exploitation of the "have nots" by the "haves" and
maybe I'll begin to take the libertarian views seriously.

True, the current U.S. government hasn't done all of the abovementioned tasks
all that well, but at least there is a vehicle which the government can work
with to solve the problems that exist today. All I've read in your magazine is
what's wrong with the current governmental systems and a bunch of quotes from
libertarians or anarchists talking in generalities. Try taking a specific
example of some kind of problem and then state in specific terms how a
libertarian society at least would attempt to come to grips with it, e.g.,
helping victims of a polio epidemic who were unable to help themselves.

As far as I know, no civilization has survived for any appreciable amount of
time in an anarchist state. I think of the old west and what a mess it was with
bandits robbing trains and gun duels in the street and so on. Set up a society
from its roots and project how you see it would be in 100 years under anarchy.

I think we're in a sad state of affairs when we think of ourselves first so much
we lose track of others and of the sense of mankind that John Dunne so aptly
wrote about. I hate governmental corruption and injustices as much as you do,
but I just don't think libertarianism is the right way to go. I think it's a
step in the wrong direction - 180 degrees wrong.

**ANSWER:** This objection typifies some people's fears that anarchist societies
will not work. In time we will take each of the ideas inherent in your
objection, lay them out individually so they can be properly understood and then
shall answer them. But in the beginning we must understand the underlying
philosophy on which this objection rests.

It is this: government introduces an element to human society that makes it
possible for people, particularly the disadvantaged, to live in society. It
tempers the rough edges of human life, giving protection and justice to those
who otherwise would be crushed in the rush for survival. You are saying that
people, left untouched by governmental control, cannot be relied upon to treat
with mercy and generosity and fairness those who are weaker or who have fallen
on unfortunate circumstances.

Government alone, according to your objection, brings to society the one power
that is capable of civilizing human relationships and you suggest that without
government we would be cast into a hopeless abyss of bandits and gun duels.

In sum, then, your objection assumes that:

1) people left to themselves will not take care of their unfortunate
neighbors. People will not freely help anyone, particularly those who can in no
way return the favor. Their only concern is themselves and the whole of natural
human society is rooted in the reality that only the strong will survive.

2) government alone can correct this human deficiency. Government and governors
apparently are immune from the human failing detailed in the first point. From
this we must conclude that the governing class is made up of a specially endowed
race of human beings who are possessed of characteristics of generosity and
mercy unknown anywhere else in the human family.

3) government has a moral claim nobody else has that authorizes it to coercively
redistribute wealth from those who produce it to those who cannot take care of
themselves. The unfortunate have a claim on others to support them and that if
this support isn't voluntarily forthcoming it can be wrenched by force from
those who do not freely choose to give it.

### Deserve Discussion

Each of these premises, to say the least, is highly questionable, but because
they are implicit in your objection they deserve to be discussed.

Apparently you have grown up in a much different world than I have because all
around me I meet people helping other people and not asking anything in
return. And this is in spite of all the government programs that discourage this
kind of voluntary neighborliness. The thousands of private charitable
organizations in this country give an irrefutable answer to your assumption that
only government can and will help the disadvantaged. In addition to the many
formal institutions of charity, there are an untold number of private acts of
charity that escape public attention altogether but which, nevertheless, add a
most humanizing element to social life.

Only by ignoring altogether the multitude of non-coercive acts of charity that
exist all around us can you begin to believe your assumption that the government
was the only institution that would have helped You and your folks through your
severe health problem. Admittedly, the government did come to your help, but
that doesn't prove no one else would have. All it demonstrates for sure is that
no one else needed to.

Your second assumption springs quite naturally from your first. If people will
not voluntarily assist their neighbors, then the only way to get them to do so
is to force them into it.

Who is to do the forcing? If all people are naturally uncaring and selfish then
we cannot hope to find anyone possessing the qualities of mercy and generosity
needed to care for the unfortunate. Any who step forward for the task must
immediately be suspect for their true motives.

However, if you now deny your first proposition and allow that there indeed are
people possessed of the qualities needed to unselfishly aid their brothers, then
there are two questions that need be asked.

1) Why is a coercive power needed to force people to pay for this charity if
there are people who will voluntarily shoulder the burden of their less
fortunate neighbors? If you answer that it is because there aren't enough of
these people around with enough money to adequately take care of the needs of
the disadvantaged, then:

2) Where do those who use government to force others to pay the bill for this
coerced "charity" get the privilege of playing Robin Hood? Were do they get the
right to take the products of one persons labor and forcibly redistribute it to
someone else who has not earned it? You are ignoring the one person in this
highwayman's game who is always a victim - the taxpayer. When you tax him you
have admitted that he wouldn't freely have given you his money, so where do you
get the right to reach into his pocket to take what you want from him? You may
try to excuse this act of thefta as being necessary for a noble purpose, but
don't hide its nature as an act of plunder. Who is there that will protect the
producer from the ravishing raids of the politically powerful who have set upon
their course of plunder wrapped behind a cloak of humanitarianism?

### No Divine Right

Long ago we should have given up the notion that there is som kind of divine
right among rulers, that these political masters are cut from a different cloth
than the rest of humankind. This fairy tale just doesn't wash. The presence of
such jewels as Richard Nixon and Co. should cause even the most believing of
today's believers to question the notion that members of the political class
have particularly noble and generous characters and are possessed of angelic
qualities lacking in the rest of humanity. The governing class is not an elite
arising from the people ordained to save mankind from itself. If history should
teach us anything, it is that the political class is composed basically of
self-servers who thirst for power and privilege and who have found in government
the perfect vehicle to achieve their purpose. They are not the noble denizens of
this earth that you picture them to be.

You have suggested that an anarchist world would be one full of bandits and gun
duels. But the truth is quite contrary. It's a world in which states exist that
is full of banditry and gun duels. Governments are virtually unable to check the
acts of individual violence that abound in this country and in many cases are
directly and indirectly involved in causing them. Throw in a hopelessly outdated
court system that doesn't dispense justice and hardly even gets around to
dispensing the law, and you have a system that fails miserably to operate the
one service government defenders always claim government alone is capable of
providing.

But beyond that there is one fact that government defenders often choose to
ignore. That is: The biggest and most aggressive bandits and murderers are the
governments themselves. Whatever violence there would be in anarchist societies
could only pale in comparison to the violence governments through wars and
persecutions have brought to human history.

The legalized murder and plunder that go under the name of war are the creations
of your beloved government. All the broken lives, destroyed homes, mained
individuals and slaughtered peoples that war leaves in its wake are the children
of that state that you so unhesitatingly turn to to be the defender of the
downtrodden and helpless.

For everyone like you who has benefitted from the state's system of organized
theft, there are dozens whose lives have been ruined or destroyed by that same
state. Government stands condemned by it own record as an institution that for
centuries has been responsible for massive terror, torture, and
slaughter. Government has no equal in this grizzly busines - and never will.

what I have written so far has largely been a negative response to your
remarks. Let me for a bit approach this subject from the positive aspect of
anarchism. Anarchism is not a dead or negative philosophy as you suggest - it is
very much alive with a positive message for humankind. Far from being solely
bent on trying to tear down government, anarchists are a people of peace who ask
nothing more than that people respect the humanity and individuality of each
other and reject coercion as a way of life. Of course we condemn government
every opportunity we get because we recognize it as the single greatest threat
there is to human peace and well being. But our attacks on the state are rooted
not only in our knowledge that government by its very nature is destructive of
true society, but also in our conviction that the full benefits of social life
can come only to free people, and, conversely, that only free people can create
a climate where true society can flourish.

### Individuals Responsible

Anarchist societies will place responsibility for order directly on free
individuals, not on formal government. As William Reichert pointed out so well
in his book Partisans of Freedom, authoritarians place their faith in the
repressive state while anarchists put their trust in social man.

Paraphrasing David T. Wieck, Reichert writes: "Anarchism is not opposed to
organization that depends upon the authoritarian principle of command and
compulsion for its success. An anarchist society, building upon th social
responsibility and initiative of primary groups acting voluntarily, will
gradually develop the libertarian social foundations essential for a truly free
society."

Anarchism doesn't pretend to offer answers to all the social, economic, and
political problems that confront us. It's no grand blueprint that attempts to
spell out in detail how anarchist societies of the future will be organized and
will solve the problems that confront them.

You challenge me to "set up a society from its roots and project how you see it
would be in 100 years under anarchy." In doing so you approach anarchist
political philosophy with the same premises you have borrowed from statist
ideology. You suggest by such a comment that it is in the power of an anarchist
to dream up some social model and program how people would exist in that sort of
world. Statists have been trying to do that for centuries and they've always
failed.

We don't view people as clay to be shaped and moulded according to our schemes
and we have no desire to create models for the future. It's not because our
imaginations lack the vitality possessed by other mortals. Rather, it's due to
our belief that people know what they want out of life, know how best to achieve
it for themselves, and, if left alone, will do so in an orderly and peaceful
manner.

We're no afflicted by the urge to create grand designs and then pretend somehow
that these visions bear any relationship to what is or could be.

In sum, then, the question is not whether anarchist societies will take care of
those who are unable to provide for themselves, but rather whether the aid some
few have received from the government isn't greatly overbalanced by the misery,
destruction and chaos that governments have always wreaked on the human
community.


## OBJECTION #10

Some libertarians have defined libertarianism as based on the premise that it is
illegitimate to engage in aggression against non-aggressors. As far as it goes,
this is fine, but you can do all sorts of damage as well as intolerable
annoyance without any physical aggression whatever.

Suppose my neighbor didn't enjoy having me for a neighbor so he held meetings
outside my door making as much noise as possible at all hours of the day and
night. In this case there is no physical aggression, an so I assume that in a
libertarian society I would have to put up with the annoyance. Or suppose a
young lady is approached by a man who persistently desires to engage in sexual
adventures with her, but she has no interest in such doings. He has a right to
free speech and he keeps pestering her with his solicitations, much to her
displeasure.

Where would you draw the line? When does one person's behavior, which in
moderation may be offensive, become something you can reasonably defend yourself
from?

William J. Boyer

**ANSWER:** You are right, of course. There are all sorts of "aggressions" such
as you suggest in your objection.

One of the homes in my neighborhood, for example, is peopled by college kids who
on occasion enjoy sharing their music with everyone within a 100-mile
radius. Again, the other day when riding the bus to work one woman got on who
was proudly displaying a grossly pornographic magazine. Some of us whose sexual
interests don't lie in such directions could have been offended by the picture.

In the first case, where does the pleasure these college students get from being
deafened by their music end and my love for tranquility begin? In the second,
where does the woman's pleasure in pornography end before it begins infringing
on my desire not to look at such material?

Obviously, in the cases cited both in the question and above, there is
conflict. Whether it's resolvable or not is another matter. In beginning our
consideration of this issue it will be helpful to recognize a couple points.

1) These problems exist today in a world full of government. They will exist in
an anarchist world, too. But let's not suppose that they will in any way be
peculiar to an anarchist society. The objection's implication is that today
there are ways to deal with these problems - effective ways - that will not be
available in an anarchist setting. Which brings us to a second point.

2) Since these problems will always exist, how are they to be handled? Herein
lies the difference between the anarchist approach and the approach taken by
those who choose to use coercion.

The statist argues that coercion is the only historically tried and proven
method available for resolving problems arising between people. Because coercion
is used and because it "works" (someone eventually is clubbed into submission),
no further defense of their position is required, the argument goes. By
implication they assume that the argument for or against their position is
closed and that the only things about which there need to be discussion are the
proposals offered as alternatives to coercion. No other method has been tried,
they argue, and so those who propose other ways must satisfactorily (to their
satisfaction, that is) prove that those other ways "will work." It's interesting
to note here that the statists who raise this point will often insist that a
libertarian be able to prove beyond question that in a free society any and all
possible problems will be settled perfectly to everyone's complete
satisfaction. Furthermore, these problems must be able to be settled before they
ever arise - that is, we must have a patent perfect answer for "solving" every
imaginable hypothetical example thrown at us. If we are unable to do so - to
their complete satisfaction - then our approach toward dealing with social
problems is discarded out of hand as "useless," "idealistic," "unworkable." Ask
their "system to withstand the same rigid interrogation and they will cry that
we are being unreasonable. Certainly their system has flaws, they answer, but
it's better than something that hasn's been tried, isn't it they ask
rhetorically.

It's not without reason that statists have long employed this line of
argument. By so doing they can put their position beyond dispute and throw the
whole weight of the argument on the shoulders of their opponents.

Since some social problems by their very nature are unsolvable to all parties'
satisfaction, then, given the conditions the statists impose on the argument,
whatever anarchists suggest as ways to approach handling such problems will be
vehemently criticized as "impractical" and discarded as "idealistic."

In due course we will consider what, if anything, might be done in anarchist
societies to deal with difficult social conflicts, but first we must consider
the prevailing notion that coercion is a useful method for settling social
problems.

One of the first things to note is that state-administered coercion doesn't
settle social conflicts, as its proponents would like us to believe. Rather, it
causes these conflicts to smoulder as the parties to the disputes chafe under
the injustice they feel has been done to them, and it creates a whole new set of
conflicts as the disputants struggle to control the state mechanism itself. This
latter fact is something statists wish us to ignore because herein lies the real
cancer of their system. The struggle for power, for the opportunity to dominate
and dictate what shall and shall not be done lies at the heart of our
condemnation of their whole system. It is precisely this struggle for power that
leads to the major social ills we face today.

Conflicts between individuals or small groups of people historically pale in
comparison to the massive social disruption the state has caused. The statists
cannot deny the wars, concentration camps, and torture that have been such an
ugly part of history, but they attempt to put the blame for them on "human
nature," a bogey man they for centuries have carried in their closet of
arguments against freedom. They say that it is an evil human nature that causes
these terrible things and that it is government that really holds this perverse
nature in check. Without government we would all fall on each other in an orgy
of theft, slaughter, and mayhem, or, at any rate, so their litany goes.

Anarchists reply that it isn't "human nature" that is responsible for these
ills. Rather, it is the very system of government that creates the worst of the
problems and perpetuates them and provides a "justification" for them.

Blatant personal use of violence (murder, theft, extortion, etc.) is recognized
by the common mass of human kind as wrong. It's an undesirable and unwanted part
of life and in our everyday life we would no sooner think of using it than we
would wish that it was used on us. The bully, that is the person who resorts to
coercion and violence in his dealings with others, is recognized for what he
is. There is no moral justification for a bully's acts and, given the
opportunity, no one would have the slightest qualm of conscience about resisting
a bully's aggression.

The above is obvious. Obvious, that is, until the bully is the
government. Government claimsa special moral legitimacy for its existence and
its actions. All too sadly for human history, people traditionally have been
trained to support these claims.

Rudolf Rocker describes this process in Nationalism and Culture:

> Thus gradually a separate class evolved whose occupation was war and rulership
> over others. But no power can in the long run rely on brute force
> alone. Brutal force may be the immediate means for the subjugation of men, but
> alone it is incapable of maintaining the rule of the individual or of a
> special caste over whole groups of humanity. For that more is needed; the
> belief of man in the inevitability of such power, the belief in its divinely
> willed mission. ["We're on a mission from Gad!" - Elwood BLues.] Such a belief
> is rooted deeply in man's religious feelings and gains power with tradition,
> for above the traditional hovers the radiance of religious concepts and
> mystical obligation.

Over the centuries the rationale for this legitimacy has changed, but it's there
nonetheless. From being the will of the gods, to being something sanctioned by
divine right, form an expression of democracy to the product of an historical
dialectic, governments have grasped onto whatever fashionable political theology
was current to excuse and defend their existence. Particular governments might
fall, but government itself as an institution stood bedrock-solid.

Anarchists, however, challenge the whole structure of government itself,
recognizing in it the chief cause of the principal ills facing human
society. Our position strikes at the roots of the whole system, not just at the
people who temporarily hold power. We know that power corrupts and that the
solution is to eliminate the power structures that breed social discord, not to
find perfect humans who will be immune to the tempting spell power casts over
people.

Anarchists recognize that when coercion is used to settle disputes, the
conflicts, as often as not, expand, they don't contract. Force by its nature
generates an excuse for more force. Whether the wielder of the force be the
individuals immediately involved in the dispute or whether it be the government
(through its police), the nature of force remains the same and eventually the
outcome of its use is disastrous.

While coercion, no matter who uses it, is destructive, there is a crucial
distinction between the private use of coercion as it is wielded by the
state. To illustrate this fact, let's return briefly to one of the examples
cited earlier.

Suppose that my patience with the loud music coming from a neighbor's home has
reached its end and I physically restrain them from playing the music. Whether
my other neighbors agree with what I did or not, they would recognize my action
simply as a violent reprisal for which I am accountable. The rightness or
wrongness of my action will be judged on the merits of the case itself.

Suppose, instead, that I call on a policeman to do the coercing for me. Once the
uniformed coercer intervenes, the public will no longer judge the issue solely
on its merits. Rather, it now becomes a question of "was the law broken?" As a
result, people become more interested in controlling the lawmaking and
interpreting machinery than they are with establishing systems for justly
settling their conflicts.

Law relieves people of the need to find ways for peacefully negotiating
solutions to their problems. It gives them a club with which they crush their
neighbor into submission, and having the club, they use it. In the name of the
"law" government can do all sorts of legally attrocious things and with
confidence proclaim, "we had a right to do what we did."

Because government exists, my college-age neighbors and I can struggle to
dominate each other behind the shield of the policeman. We can deal with each
other violently and righteously and that's a fact that has far broader
implications than statists wish to recognize.

Among those ignored consequences of state-administered coercion are these:

1) By using the policeman we can remain anonymous in our acts of violence
against our neighbors. No one ever need know who "complained" to the police and,
consequently, all the neighbors become suspect in the eyes of the one accused of
violating the law. It's hardly a way to foster strong community bonds.

2) By resorting to the government we mask the nature of coercion behind a shield
of respectability. We have hidden from ourselves the genuine brutality of the
act itself. We ignore the essential nature of the act, uncritically excusing it
as something the government has a right to do simply because it is the
government.

3) We give to the political machine a power and "right" to act under a set of
moral guidelines quite unlike any that are applicable to the rest of the human
community. Where it would be blatantly wrong for an individual to use force and
violence against another, the wrongness of that violence is obscured when it is
used by the state. For me to steal from my neighbors is wrong. Without exception
I couldn't find a neighbor who would disagree with me on that. But if I
"authorize" a third party (the tax collector) to do my robbing for me, my
neighbors become confused about their right to defend themselves from the
thievery. This whole mental subservience makes us perfect targets for most
anything the government wants to do to us.

In conclusion, then, I argue that coercion, and in particular institutionalized
coercion administered by the state, is a socially destructive way of handling
disputes. I also challenge the idea that legislated violence is a time-tested
means for achieving peace among people.

But having argued that, the original question still remains unanswered: "in
anarchist societies can people protect themselves from offensive behavior?"

Let me answer this in two ways. First, by referring you to an article that
appeared in Liberty, an American anarchist journal published by Benjamin
R. Tucker. The article appears at the [at this location]. The article is an
exchange between Wordsworth Donisthorpe and Tucker. It covers the same issue we
are discussing here and in outline form presents Tucker's answer to this
objection.

Second, in addition to Tucker's answer, let me add that the foundation on which
an anarchist society will be built is toleration. There will be no anarchist
world unless people are genuinely tolerant of the things that make their
neighbors different from them. Sometimes these differences are offensive to us,
but unless we are willing to bear with them until they become threateningly
oppressive, we will never see a world built on peace through a respect for
individual freedom. This doesn't mean that we can't let our neighbors know we
don't appreciate their quirks or outrageous behavior, but it does mean we will
first search for every means other than coercion to deal with the conflict. If
we become totally frustrated, having exhausted every peaceful means we could,
and, we finaly resort to coercion, we must recognize it as a collapse of a
better way of dealing with problems and not, as it is today, as something we
have a "right" to do.

When there really is no socially sanctioned alternative - when people can no
longer rely on the police to do their bidding - then people will begin dealing
with problems personally and peacefully.

Being an anarchist, I had to respect my neighbors' wish to listen to loud
music. I can assure you I didn't enjoy it. Fortunately, those neighbors have
since moved and the problem resolved itself. But if the problem had become
unbearable my first responsibility would have been to talk with them about
it. If that had failed, then I would have had to look for other, non-violent
means of handling the situation. I could have suggested to their landlord that
he ask them to turn their music down, or I could have bought some earplugs and
shut the noise out totally. There are other things that could have been done
before I ever turned to coercion.

The point is that when people are committed to finding non-coercive means of
dealing with the things that annoy us, then we will have made our first major
step toward a peaceful world. Violence may still erupt sporadically, but it will
not be the institutionalized violence so widespread today. In a libertarian
society it will no longer be a matter of trying to minutely define and determine
where our "rights" end and another begin. The emphasis will be on toleration and
it will create an entirely different approach to dealing with problems.

When violence does flare up I suggest that one means of trying to handle such
situations would be through community juries. Such juries would have a full
range of responsibility for dealing not only with whether the parties to the
confLict were justified in resorting to violence, but also what if any
punishment should be inflicted for a wrongful use of force. Lysander Spooner
detailed the powers and responsibilities such juries might have, so I refer you
to his An Essay on the Trial By Jury for further reading.

But community juries are only one possibility. Free people have been ingenious
in finding ways for overcoming their problems - and they will be equally
ingenious in this area of administrative justice. It would be foolish for us to
define and limit those possibilities now. The future must be free to make
itself. There is no single way for handling all problems and I trust that in a
libertarian world people would discover many effective ways for peacefully and
constructively dealing with the social difficulties they encounter.

Since government-dominated society has led us repeatedly to gross injustice, to
wars, and to other massive violence, the libertarian alternative is certainly
worth considering.


## OBJECTION #11

The trouble with anarchism is anarchists. They are verbalists, voluntarists, and
romantics. They do not understand the problem and they don't want to. They do
not know how to solve the problem and they don't want to. They are dreamers, not
doers.

What prompts these remarks is the preposterous article in your Spring, 1978
issue. Ron Classen challenges you there to be specific and concrete, and you
respond with some general and vague reasons for being general and vague. Good
grief!

Let me suggest that there is a specific and concrete method for penetrating to
the root of political government and destroying it. For lack of a better name,
let's call this method "direct democracy." The idea behind direct democracy is
that as soon as governments must entice customers to support their services
rather than being able to coerce them into supporting them, then governments
will begin behaving pretty much like any other industry and a host of ancient
problems traditionally associated with government will vanish. This is not an
overnight project, but it can be accomplished gradually and it is the only
feasible approach there is.

I don't really expect romantic anarchists to accept this approach. Given their
utopian attitudes it is certainly no surprise that they fail to see the
importance of consumer sovereignty. Every practical man however knows the power
of the pursestring, yet this reality seems to have escaped anarchists. Which
leads me to predict that anarchism, when it comes, will not be achieved by
anarchists, or at least not by romantic anarchists.

I have yet to see a single anarchist document that evidences the slightest
awareness or understanding of what is, really, a very simple and obvious defect
in the government industry. At first glance you'd suppose that everybody who
took Economis 101 would fully understand the problem.

Consumer sovereignty means that each consumer only has his share of control over
industry's total revenues. to the extent that an industry insists on doing what
customers don't want, under consumer sovereignty it shrivels and eventually goes
broke. End of problem. To the extent that it does what its paying customers
want, they give it the revenues it needs and everyone is happy. No problem.

But when any industry finds itself able to enjoy supplier sovereignty (supplier
sovereignty is the ability of the supplier to conrol its own total revenue) it
goes unstable and flagrantly acts contrary to its customers' desires. Government
is just another industry. Remember, an industry is defined in terms of its
products, and governments are firms engaged in supplying certain kinds of
products (sweeping streets, killing crooks, pushing papers).

But all existing governments are political governments. Politics, the acme of
supplier sovereignty, is counterproductive wherever it exists. The government
problem exists because political governments enjoy supplier sovereignty. Similar
problems would exist with any industry that enjoyed the same. This problem can
be solved only by eliminating supplier sovereignty and establishing consumer
sovereignty. In doing so no utopia will be created. Governments will become no
better than other kinds of firms. But they will be no worse, which is the
important thing.

What is needed is for citizens themselves to directly and continually be able to
determine the total revenues and how these revenues are spent of each and every
taxing agency to which each citizen is liable. It's that simple. He who controls
the pursestrings holds the final reins of power.

[At this point, there is described in some detail a system for establishing and conducting "preliminary budgetary ballots." These, the writer says, could be incorporated into the official, annual election process - MEC]

Elected officials, who naturally desire to be reelected, will stray little from
their constituents' expressed desires. Eventually the process can be made
binding as a fiduciary duty upon all elected and appointed officers of
government. At which point political government will have been exterminated.

Consumer sovereignty is a necessary condition for any industry to be effective,
efficient, and stable. But supplier sovereignty is a sufficient condition for
any industry to be destructive, predatory, and unstable. Political government
can be destroyed a few percent per year, year by year. It's the only feasible
approach there is.

\- J.G. Krol

ANSWER: Because of space limitations I had to condense considerably Mr. Krol's
argument, but I hope I have sufficiently preserved the flavor and content of his
objection. Trusting that I have done so, I proceed with an answer.

Mr. Krol makes the fundamental mistake of assuming that government is just
another industry providing a range of services. He couldn't be more wrong, and
in his error misinterprets grossly the thrust of the anarchist attack on
government.

Government is not - cannot be - defined by the "services" it
provides. Historically, its unique characteristic has not been that it has made
roads, delivered mail, swept streets, pushed papers or killed crooks. It's
fundamental characteristic has been the means it has used to exist, not the
things it has done.

Benjamin R. Tucker defined government as "the subjection of the noninvasive
individual to a will not his own." Whether the person(s) doing the subjecting
are lone individuals, gangs of ruffians or "legally" authorized representatives
of the state, makes not the least bit of difference. They are all acting as
governments whenever they force a non-invasive individual to do something that
person doesn't freely choose to do. Coercion is the key ingredient of
government. It is its distinguishing characteristic. It is the thing that makes
goverment government.

If Mr. Krol doesn't accept this definition, then let him show why the anarchist
definition of government is inadequate. Let him show us that coercion is not the
distinguishing characteristic of that institution that throughout history has
carried the name "government." Otherwise, we will be embroiled in a hopeless and
purposeless semantic debate.

Like other mini-government people, Mr. Krol appears more to be threatened by the
word "anarchism" itself than by the actual philosophy of anarchism. Like the
rest of us he was raised with the idea that government is a necessary part of
social life. He hasn't been able to break the bonds of that indoctrination. He
knows that coercion is evil, so he fantasizes that somehow, somewhere a
non-coercive "government" can be organized that will be fully responsive to its
constituents' wishes. It will keep the streets clean, carry away the garbage,
and deliver the mail and for all these services the people will voluntarily pay
the bill. Mr. Krol's idea is that all we have to do is find a way to let the
people vote how much they want to be taxed and how they want their tax money
spent and we will have found the secret to non-violent government.

Any notion that government will let its victims (that is, the general populace)
determine how much tax money will be taken and how the tax money will be spent
is folly. By confining yourself to Economics 101, you might think that
Mr. Krol's plan is realistic and workable. But a glance at Political Science 101
will convince even the dullest-witted that government isn't going to allow any
such thing to happen. After all, what would be the purpose of governing if you
couldn't govern? Without control of the pursestrings, as Mr. Krol so well points
out, you cannot rule. And ruling is the business of government.

Mr. Krol argues that we can have government (a coercive institution) by
"consumer sovereignty" (that is, through voluntary consent). He has constructed
a dream-world institution that has no relationship to any government that has
ever existed or ever can.

He refuses to understand the true nature of the enemy the anarchists are really
fighting.

By its nature government takes what it wants - it doesn't ask for it. The monies
we pay into its coffers aren't free will offerings any more than the draft was
voluntary service.

Using Mr. Krol's guidelines we can reasonably imagine a group of people
voluntarily contributing money to form a pirate organization which is designed
to steal from others and to make slaves of people outside the
organization. Those inside the organization will not adversely feel the theft or
slavery. They could enjoy 100 percent "consumer sovereignty" (the government
does exactly what they want it to). For them "consumer sovereignty" is working
just fine. But for the exploited it's still exploitation. As much as Mr. Krol
might like to ingnore it, "consumer sovereignty" is no protection from the evils
government forever creates.

The mafia and other "criminal" gangs are criminal not because of what they do
(because what they do really isn't much different from what the government
does), but because a prevailing and more powerful gang of thugs has "outlawed"
them. If the mafia were able to overpower the now dominating ring of governors
and establish itself as the single coercive agent in a given area, then it would
assume the same status the government enjoys today. It would "legitimate" its
power and find all manner of excuses why it should rule.

Whether a government wields its power democratically (by counting the power of
noses), or aristocratically (by assuming that some are better than others and
therefore ought to rule), or by simple conquest (might makes right), it rules
because it holds the balance of coercive power.

Mr. Krol suggests that anarchists are our own worst enemies. We are visionaries
and idealists who have no contact with reality, he says.

Perhaps to some extent he is right.

So long as a free world is kept from being because of a group of government
meddlers, then it must remain only a dream. So long as some choose to coerce
others, then to that extent we will not have an anarchist society. Anarchists
are not interested in perpetuating the ugly scars created by government
interference in the natural life of society. We don't want the wars and
persecutions and terro government for centuries has plagued us with. We believe
in a social order built on human cooperation and mutual aid.

If these be idealistic notions, then we are glad to be idealists. We don't offer
detailed and grand plans for how a free society can be achieved and held
together. We are not interested in building systems and then making people fit
into them. We trust that when left to ourselves we will freely find a multitude
of ways for dealing with each other and the problems that arise between us.

Mr. Krol seems annoyed that I won't draw out plans for how a free society will
be organized. But in doing so he fails to understand the very roots of
anarchism. We are not system builders - that is, we are not afflicted with
governmentitis. Rather, we advocate letting people find the free and peaceful
systems that best handle their peculiar problems. We don't want to organize
society, we want society to organize itself.

Because of the length of this Objection to Anarchism and the several points
raised here, I felt it was necessary to divide the objection into parts - each
of which has been assigned a number. In responding to the objection these
numbers will be used as reference points.

the editor


Resource: http://flag.blackened.net/daver/anarchism/objections.html
