# The Hiddens Wanderings of Durruti

## The Year the Spanish Anarchists Robbed the American Banks

A violent rapping on Félix López's door. It was six in the morning. Could it be
the police? No. They were the knockings of Pedro Nolasco Arratia, companion in
misadventure of the clandestine group Light and Action, and an
anarcho-syndicalist leader, like Félix. He came in secret; rapidly he must get
to Matta Avenue, to the headquarters of the IWW, the organization of the
Anarchist Workers of the World. He should ask no questions, Arratia said, it was
an affair about which no-one should know anything. It was the month of July, it
was the depths of Winter, in Santiago de Chile. The year was 1925.

There were no more than 5 people in the IWW offices. They all had quirky, strong
Spanish accents. Only two spoke. One was big-bodied, extrovert, friendly,
passionate, with an open gaze and a lot of charisma. The other was short, thin,
very serious and very nervous. López recalls: "a tiny fellah, but one who exuded
courage". The first was Buenaventura Durruti, the other, Francisco Ascaso. The
rest were: Ascaso's brother, Alejandro; Gregorio Jover and Antonio Rodríguez, El
Toto. It was he who, after the Chilean hold-ups, would return to France, taking
with him 47,000 pesos for the struggle against the dictatorship in Spain.

All were members of the Anarchist Group, the Solidarios, throughout their
travels known as The Wanderers, about whom López and Arratia had heard almost
unbelievable stories regarding their infamous attack on the bank of Spain in
Gijón in 1923, as well as other actions of a similarly incredible nature.

## Condemned to Death

López could tell that Durruti and Ascaso were more than just friends, they were
inseparable brothers who understood one another by just a simple glance. Durruti
had broken Ascaso out of Saragossa Prison just a short time before Ascaso
--already sentenced to death-- was expected to be riddled by the bullets of a
firing-squad. Also, they had shared the life of exile in Belgium and France,
while together planning, and carrying out, a series of high level guerilla
attacks. Between 1923 and 1930, the Primo de Rivera dictatorship years, they
were a constant headache for the régime, as was the powerful anarcho-syndicalist
CNT (Confederación Nacional de Trabajadores)--with its 250,000 members) to which
they belonged.

Without López knowing anything about it till then --the Wanderers stop-off in
Chile was an unforeseen one-- they had come to visit during their trip through
South America "gathering funds" to finance the CNT, the guerillas and the most
radical section of the Spanish Workers' Movement. These had been decimated and
brutally repressed by Primo de Rivera. According to Hugh Thomas, some 40,000 CNT
members, at this time, filled Spanish jails. Whatever, Durruti and his pals
still had the good-breeding to distribute part of their hard-earned takings to
all the anarchist unions in all the countries they visited.

"Six masked men raided the Matadero Branch of the Bank of Chile and, having
wounded two employees, made their getaway in a Hudson, taking the 30,000 pesos
--which were kept in the vaults-- with them ". Thus ran the headline in the late
evening Santiago Las Ultimas Noticias (The Latest News), which made no attempt
to go into details.

The Police never really knew anything. They only had their suspicions.

Nobody really knew who the true perpetrators were, why the robbery had been
carried out with such daring, nor what had become of the booty. That is,
perhaps, why the Chilean press could find nothing better to do than nickname the
gang the Apaches.

Felix López is already (1994) an old man of 90. He lives alone, as he always has
done, in Sotomayor Street, Santiago, Chile. Arratia died in the 1940s. Recently,
however, López has been willing to reveal what he saw and knew of Durruti's
wandering outlaws, and of his own, while they were in the country. Though, of
course --as a good, distrustful anarchist, despite the many years which have
passed-- he refused to be photographed. He had been one of the leaders of the
Chilean Anarchists, in the Construction Union, with a good deal of clout in the
twenties and thirties.

Durruti and his boys never asked for any help from López and Arratia, in terms
of manpower, in any of their bank raids. They only wanted the minimum, precise
information needed to plan the robbery. The Chileans supplied them with
information. According to López this was of a general and not very useful
nature. It was more or less a case of "Hello, Goodbye".

López said: "Durruti was already well-known to us. Quite often we would publish
things about the activities of our Spanish comrades, and, the best known
pratictioner of 'Anarchy by the Deed' was him. Durruti said to us: 'You are in
need of economic funds. We are going to get them for you'. All five of them
appeared to be fine, well-dressed gentlemen". He went on to say that they wanted
to pass unnoticed. In spite of the situation, Arratia and he couldn't help
laughing because Durruti's accent was such an immediate give-away. "They asked
us not to tell anyone about the meeting we had had. We asked no questions and
they gave us no more explanations. Durruti laughingly said that if he told us
anymore, we would probably go around with looks of astonishment on our faces. He
told us to cheer up and to let him help us. And, sure enough, he got money".

"How much?" Felix López did not remember, but it was no small sum, he
recalled. With the funds, they financed unions, set up a printing-press,
organized meetings and put on plays for the workers.

## The Big One

Durruti's Wanderers did all the work alone. And it was perfect.

The raids carried out by Durruti and his gang while in Chile were probably five
in number. It is known that they worked in Santiago on the 18th and 19th of
July. The Press, however, only entered into great details --and in for a great
deal of speculation-- about the great Bank of Chile raid. This was the very
first bank-raid ever to take place in the entire history of the country.

A police report, only made out months after the Wanderers had already left, only
pointed out that some Spaniards (no other identity was established) had "worked
in various professions until the day the robbery took place", and had taken up
normal work once again until the early days of August. The landlady of the small
hotel where they had stayed revealed much later that there had been five of
them, "educated gentlemen", but "gentlemen" who continually talked about social
struggles and who called themselves revolutionaries, in search of funds destined
to finance the overthrow of the Spanish Monarchy.

The raid took place at 1.15 p.m., Thursday, the 16th July, 1925. Las Ultimas
Noticias editorialized that "the deed reminds one of the most sensationalist of
American movies, or, rather, it was probably inspired by just such
sensationalistic movie scenes".

The five masked Spaniards committed the hold-up. Levelling their pistols at the
cashier and employees, they made off with more than 30,000 pesos, a more than
very tidy sum for the times.

Three days later, with the Chilean Capital still in an uproar over what had
happened, the first, semi-certitude emerged; the coup had been the work of
outsiders. As a direct consequence of this, the police rounded up a great many
of the then not too populous foreign community.

A reporter for another Santiagan newspaper mocked at what some people were
saying about what he dubbed "this affair carried out by of a vulgar robber whose
only near-victim had been a minor Railway clerk". Though the journalist had been
dismissive, following López's account, the job had also been the handiwork of
Durruti and the Wanderers. Similarly, a journal of the times made mention of the
fact that the vaults of the Santiagan Aristocratic Horseman's Club had also been
completely cleaned out, by authors of identity unknown.

Meanwhile, the police continued to round up suspects. One of those affected by
the arrests was the Hudson's chauffeur who had been used in the robbery. He was
a taxi-driver called Enrique Barcoj. The robbers had made him stop his taxi and
had forced him to drive them to the bank. Las Ultimas Noticias pointed out that,
once the raid had been successfully concluded, the taxi wouldn't start up, so
"the outlaws had to push it some distance" until the engine caught. The
commentator added that, while the car was stalled, there had been an very clear
"disinclination, on the part of the general public," to, in any way, prevent the
get-away.

## The Total Failure

Owing to these "doughty deeds", Barcoj was the first to be accused of
involvement in the robbery, and he was forced to spend quite some time in the
lock-up, despite the fact that, in truth, he had really had nothing to do with
it. His story --that he had been forced into it by two Spaniards-- did not
convince the authorities. He was only finally set free when the case was closed
due to "the total failure of all their investigations", as the police themselves
recognized.

By a curious twist of fate, it was that very August, 1925, that General Ibáñez
del Campo, on general principles, had hundreds of workers' leaders, students and
homosexuals transported to the distant Easter and Robinson Crusoe Islands. One
of those to be transported was Felix López. He was being shipped out to the
islands, shackled and chained, at exactly the same time as Durruti and his men
were leaving Chile for good.

When the Press began to give voice to that popular version of the great robbery
which saw the outlaws as "elegant and devil-may-care Spanish bandits", the
Judge, His Honour Justice Fernando Soro Barriga, who initiated the criminal
proceedings, became outraged. He sent an official letter to Parliament,
complaining of "the fantastic concoctions appearing in certain newspapers
wherein these criminals are virtually deified".

Nor was Judge Soro Barriga so wide of the mark. In truth, the Press constantly
played up the spectacular nature of the raid, comparing it favourably to --what
one journalist referred to as-- "previous criminal activities of a very vulgar
sort which have taken place in this country, activities only worthy of two-bit
juvenile delinquents". Soro Barriga's strongly-worded reprimand had an immediate
effect. The "bandits from Spain thesis" was obligatorily dropped. Newspapers
were reprimanded by the authorities and warned "not to make up wild stories".

Durruti and his gang were left completely blameless, which did not particularly
bother them, if it bothered them at all, for, by now, they were back in
Europe. They arrived back after having roamed through Argentina and Montevideo,
where, in fact, they really were in danger of being caught, while carrying out
further "fund-raisings". The "clean" Chile visit had lasted about a month and
had included two cities; Valparaíso (where they had arrived by ship from Cuba)
and Santiago. This was without counting their passing-through the City of Los
Andes. From there, they took the Trans-Andean train, as common, rustic
passengers, arriving in the Argentinian City of Mendoza.

## The Flashback

In December, 1924, with false passports, Buenaventura Durruti and Francisco
(Paco) Ascaso left from Le Havre, aboard a Dutch freighter bound for the
Antillas. Ricardo Sanz had arrived in Paris. He was the replacement, in the
Solidarios (Solidarity) Group, for the recently murdered Gregorio Suberbiela. He
had come to inform those anarchists in exile of the desperate situation that the
CNT was then in. Economic resources "must be found" in order to get it back on
its feet once more. Thus was born the American peregrination. It was with Sanz
himself that Durruti and Ascaso mapped out their itinery. They would go on down
to Cuba from there to act in Mexico and Argentina.

They arrived in Cuba. There, they found themselves with the Machado Dictatorship
in full flower, and the workers' movement sadly withering. In Santa Clara, they
worked the sugar plantations. While there, they organized a strike over
wages. The overseers seized three striking peasants and whipped them
mercilessly, by way of scaring the others, then sent them back to work in a
wretched condition.

The following morning, the owner of the plantation was found dead in his
bed. Upon his corpse, in brightly-coloured lettering, was pinned a note which
read: "This is the Wanderers' Justice".

A hectic search was set a-foot amongst the cane-cutters to try to discover those
responsible for the murder. The question asked of each and everyone was whether
they knew who The Wanderers might be. Thus was the legend born.

From Havana, the group headed for Yucatán on the Mexican Coast. They were
arrested by the Mexican Coast Guard as "smugglers". Still, from there, they
managed to make their way to Mexico City. They were welcomed and taken in by
Rafael Quintero, a worker who had fought with Zapata. At the end of March, 1925,
they were joined by Gregorio Jover and Alejandro Ascaso, Paco's younger brother.

In the Mexico of the time --under General Plutarco Elías Calles' government--
they found internal petty struggles amongst the Anarchists, and little left of
the Revolution. The few remaining vestiges that there were revealed a pretty
depressing panorama. The Wanderers decided they would help the various Anarchist
factions with money, and thereby help re-unite the Movement.

They set themselves up in a farm in Ticomán and, from there, planned their
future "actions". In April, 1925, they robbed the Carolina Spinning Mill. They
repeated similar operations in other factories and mills. With the "funds"
raised, they built a "Rationalist School" --inspired by the teachings of
Francisco Ferrer, the anarchist educational theorist, founder of the Escuela
Moderna (the Modern School). Ferrer was sentenced to death by firing-squad in,
in Barcelona, in 1909. They also financed the publication of a magazine and sent
a very large sum of money to Sebastien Fauré, the French intellectual, so that
he might set up a Social Science Library in France.

## After Chile

In August, 1925, Durruti and his men arrived in Argentina from Chile. There,
they decided to steer well clear of banks and other similar temptations. They
began to work. Durruti became a stevedor, Francisco Ascaso, a cook, and Jover, a
cabinet-maker. Alejandro Ascaso took ship back to Cuba. Despite the best of
intentions, this new life-style lasted very little. There were soon two
armed-robberies which --even if they did not commit them-- were immediately
attributed to the gang. They were forced to go into hiding.

Their whereabouts only came to light again on the 18th of January, 1926. This
was just after they raided the San Martín Bank of Argentina. This time there was
no doubt that they were indeed the authors. The newspaper, La Prensa (The
Press), wrote:

> Seven individuals, four wearing masks, steeped down from a "Double Phaeton" at
> the corner of Buenos Aires and Belgrano Streets, just two blocks from a police
> station. Four of them entered the bank, while the other three, armed with
> rifles, stood guard, blocking the main entrance... Meanwhile, once inside, the
> four bandits moved fast. They leapt over the counters, emptied out all the
> cash registers, and gathered all the money they could find in a heap. They
> didn't even bother with the iron safe. They got away with 64,085 pesos.

In Buenos Aires wanted-posters --photographs included-- were pinned up, and a
reward offered for their capture. The Spanish Anarchists spent the first
fortnight of February fleeing from house to house on the outskirts of the
Federal Capital. These were the most nerve-wracking times of the entire Latin
American adventure. Still, they escaped safe if shaken. They managed to cross
the Río Plata and get out of Argentina. They disembarked, eventually, in the
Uruguayan Capital of Montevideo. From there, they made it back to Europe.

Buenaventura Durruti never accepted the titles of bandit or hold-up man. Such
descriptions were very far from the nature of what his acts were all about. He
maintained that, without his work "and that of a handful of dedicated
anarchists, the workers would never have achieved the necessary strength and
power which they in fact had at the very outbreak of the Civil War".

In 1933, he said: "It is indeed true that I have robbed banks. And not only in
Spain, but in other countries too. But it was always for the sake of the General
Cause. All the money went straight into the coffers of the Organization (the
CNT), since that was the its predestined destination. Nobody kept back a single
cent and, if this method was the only effective one at the time, that is because
the circumstances were radically different from those of today. Now we say 'Down
with Banditry! Up with Collective Appropriation!'

Some three years later, Durruti was struck down by a bullet in the University
City of Madrid. He was not robbing any bank: He was defending the Capital from
the Fascist Beast.
